hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan and welcome to movie
endings explained in this episode we're
going to be taking a look at the 1999
classic The Sixth Sense the chilly
psychological supernatural thriller was
a huge success becoming the second
highest-grossing film of that year
second only to Star Wars one of the
hottest topics for film fans in 1999 was
that twist ending
many people who experienced the Sixth
Sense for the first time had already
been aware of the film's final
revelation and yet it's a story that's
so well crafted and performed that it
still packs a punch whether you know or
you don't it's also one of those films
that carries the burden of a perspective
altering twist at the end that doesn't
make the film feel hollow when you re
watch it but makes the experience all
the more richer as you spot the clues
along the way some 20 years after its
release M night Shyamalan The Sixth
Sense still retains its power but does
its infamous twist ending really need to
be explained as can sometimes be the
case no not really but an exploration of
its ending can be interesting especially
when you consider the idea that this
film has more of a twist opening one
that sets up everything you need to know
as you enter the main storyline the film
centers around Bruce Willis's character
Malcolm Crowe a child psychologist and
Cole played by Haley Joel Osment Malcolm
is trying to help Cole who is a
disturbed young boy suffering from a
possible mood disorder his mother Lynne
is struggling as a single mother her
husband has left her and the death of
her own mother is hanging over her head
there is a strangeness to call that
she's definitely aware of but unable to
break through on either this is where
Malcolm comes in assigned to help Cole
who at first is resistant to Malcolm but
the two eventually grow close Malcolm is
struggling with his own marriage his
wife is distant and cold towards him
but in the end Malcolm and Cole end up
helping each other
approximately halfway through the film
Cole reveals to mal
his secret the reason he's so haunted
it's a moment that has since been
parodied into the ground and swiftly
entered the pop-culture lexicon
immediately but when viewed in the
context of the film it still resonates
strongly and so for the second half of
the film
Malcolm's skepticism is tested he begins
to realize that a patient he had tried
to help years before Vincent gray may
have been suffering from the same
ability that Cole has also been burdened
with Malcolm had been unsuccessful with
Vincent and so he tries to help Cole
find some sense of resolution to his
problem they find a use for his sixth
sense his ability to see dead people and
interact with them by having Cole figure
out what the ghosts he's seeing is still
holding on to they appear as they did
when they died and are very clearly
still struggling with their afterlife
especially as they don't even realize
they're dead Cole ends up helping a
young girl who was poisoned by her
mother revealed the truth at her funeral
which is a heartbreaking and horrifying
moment that nevertheless serves as a
catharsis for this young ghost Cole has
found a purpose a way to use his ability
for good
which leaves Malcolm to try to reconcile
his marriage his wife Anna has fallen
asleep watching their wedding video this
is the moment that not so much the penny
drops
but Malcolm's wedding ring drops
I see people
they don't know
[Music]
everything begins to slots into place
the film had opened with the prologue of
sorts with Malcolm and Anna confronted
by a now adult Vincent gray Malcolm's
former patients
he held Malcolm accountable for the way
his life had turned out and shoots him
before turning the gun on himself
[Music]
this opening sequence then gives way to
the following year where we assume that
malcolmus survived the gunshot and is
now having marital problems that stemmed
from that traumatic experience as
Malcolm begins to realize that he died
that night Shyamalan shows us some of
the ways in which this twist really
works and isn't just a cheap gotcha
style reveal as Malcolm comes to terms
with the truth he goes back to Anna and
reconciles their unfinished business
namely her feeling that he always placed
his work above her even though she's
asleep it appears as though he's
actually able to communicate with her
that she heard his message and this last
scene finally brings closure to
Malcolm's afterlife so the big twist is
of course that Malcolm was dead for the
majority of the movie and the entirety
of the main storyline and here are some
of the ways in which M Knight really
played fair with this twist so the final
revelation really feels earned right
from the beginning of the film we see
Malcolm get shot it's almost too bold it
gives the game away instantly but you
still have no reason to believe that
when we first see Malcolm sat on a bench
opposite Cole's house that he's a ghost
even when Cole spots Malcolm and begins
to run away it doesn't signpost the
twist all that obviously at all at this
point we don't know that Cole can see
the dead but even so how would he know
that Malcolm is a ghost
initially later on we learned that Cole
sees ghosts the way they were when they
died throughout the film Malcolm mainly
wears a long coat covering up his shirt
Cole says that dead people only see what
they want to see so it stands to reason
that our perception of Malcolm as an
audience is the way that he still sees
himself Cole on the other hand would
have seen Malcolm the way he was when he
died with a bloody shirt from his bullet
wound so he immediately knew that
Malcolm was a ghost then there's the way
that Malcolm interacts with other people
in the film
all the huge lack thereof we see a
suggestive shot of Malcolm sitting with
Lynn Cole's mother which seems to hint
that the two had just been talking but
of course they haven't when Malcolm is
late for his anniversary dinner with his
wife he doesn't physically interact with
anything and she is simply commemorating
the anniversary alone throughout the
film Malcolm struggles with the door to
his office in the basement of his house
it doesn't open every time he tries him
we see him fishing around in his pockets
and cut to him walking down the stairs
but we never see him actually open the
door at the very end of the film he
notices that Ana has placed a table in
front of the door which is why he was
unable to open it the doorknob of the
door is also red which is a key color in
the film in the sixth sense more often
than not red equals dead at the
beginning when Cole runs away from
Malcolm the door to the church is a
vivid Dario Argento red death is the
most inescapable part of Cole's life and
the first of many hints then there's
Anna who frequently uses a red blanket
as she clearly still grieves for her
late husband at the anniversary dinner
she wears a red dress when Cole becomes
too scared of the ghosts that constantly
haunts him he hides inside a red fort
filled with religious icons the mother
who poisoned her daughter wears red at
the funeral it's a cool theme attic clue
that's never really obvious unless
you're looking for it red acts as a kind
of bridge between the land of the living
and the land of the dead when Cole is
led to the violent spirits at the top of
the spiral staircase it's a red balloon
that leads the way and then there's the
final scene with Cole and his mother
Lynn when he convinces her of his gift
and brings her closure over her own
mother's death in that scene she's also
wearing red
perhaps the biggest clue though is the
classic scene in which coal reveals to
Malcolm that he sees dead people at one
point he even looks down towards Malcolm
stomach where he would no doubt be
seeing the bullet wound that killed him
but more precisely when he references
the fact that dead people don't even
know that they're dead and that they
only see what they want to see he's
describing Malcolm who is still in
complete denial over his situation and
as Malcolm sought to reconcile his
marriage and succeed in helping a boy
like Cole where he had failed in helping
a boy like Vincent our two main
characters end up helping each other
Cole now has a purpose to help ghosts
living in a painful limbo reach a state
of peace to move on to another existence
and he actually gives Malcolm some
advice that takes on a whole new meaning
when you know that Cole always knew that
Malcolm was a ghost wait till she's
asleep then she listen you and she won't
even know it Cole knew that the only way
that Malcolm could feasibly make amends
with Ana was to do so while she was
sleeping and once Malcolm realizes the
truth at the end of the film he takes
Cole's advice to hearts and uses it to
bring this heartbreaking tale to a
bittersweet close it's one of the most
famous twist endings of all time at this
point but thankfully it's one that still
more than holds up even 20 years later
everything will be different in the
morning
you